Documentation for native MMR support (#11024)
opensearch-project/documentation-website: _vector-search/specialized-operations/vector-search-mmr.md

The maximal marginal relevance (MMR) search helps balance relevance and diversity in search results. Instead of returning only the most similar documents, MMR selects results that are both relevant to the query and different from each other. This improves the coverage of the result set and reduces redundancy, which is especially useful in vector search scenarios.

MMR re-ranking balances two competing objectives:

 - Relevance: How well a document matches the query.

 - Diversity: How different a document is from the documents already selected.

The algorithm computes a score for each candidate document using the following principle:

```json
MMR = (1 − λ) * relevance_score − λ * max(similarity_with_selected_docs)
```

Where:

 - λ is the diversity parameter (closer to 1 means higher diversity).

 - relevance_score measures similarity between the query vector and the candidate document vector.

 - similarity_with_selected_docs measures similarity between the candidate and already selected documents.

By adjusting the diversity parameter, you can control the tradeoff between highly relevant results and more diverse coverage in the result set.

# Prerequisites

> To use MMR, you must enable [system-generated search processor factories](({{site.url}}{{site.baseurl}}/search-plugins/search-pipelines/system-generated-search-processors/)). Set the `cluster.search.enabled_system_generated_factories` setting to either `*` or explicitly include the required factories:

Author: By default it is an empty list.

| ------------------------- | --------- | ----------------------------------------- |---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| `diversity`               | float     | No                                        | Controls the weight of diversity in the re-ranking process. Valid values range from `0` to `1`. A value of `1` prioritizes maximum diversity, and `0` disables diversity. Default is `0.5`. |
| `candidates`              | integer   | No                                        | Specifies how many candidate documents to oversample before re-ranking. Default is `3 * query size`.                                                                                        |
| `vector_field_path`       | string    | Optional, but required for remote indices | Path to the vector field used for MMR re-ranking. If not provided, OpenSearch resolves it automatically from the search request.                                                            |

> | `vector_field_data_type`  | string    | Optional, but required for remote indices | Data type of the vector field. Used to parse the field and calculate similarity. If not provided, OpenSearch resolves it from the index mapping.                                            |

Author: For data type and space type should we add a link to the https://docs.opensearch.org/latest/field-types/supported-field-types/knn-vector/#parameters to show what are the valid values? It should be valid values of the data type and space type of the knn vector.

has_children: false
has_math: true
---

# Vector search with MMR reranking
**Introduced 3.3**
{: .label .label-purple }

The maximal marginal relevance (MMR) search helps balance relevance and diversity in search results. Instead of returning only the most similar documents, MMR selects results that are both relevant to the query and different from each other. This improves the coverage of the result set and reduces redundancy, which is especially useful in vector search scenarios.

MMR reranking balances two competing objectives:

 - Relevance: How well a document matches the query.

 - Diversity: How different a document is from the documents already selected.

The algorithm computes a score for each candidate document using the following formula:

$$MMR = (1 − \lambda) \times \text{relevance_score} - \lambda \times max(\text{similarity_with_selected_docs})$$,

where:

 - $$\lambda$$ is the diversity parameter (closer to 1 means higher diversity).

 - $$\text{relevance_score}$$ measures similarity between the query vector and the candidate document vector.

 - $$\text{similarity_with_selected_docs}$$ measures similarity between the candidate and already selected documents.

> By adjusting $$\lambda$$, you can control the tradeoff between highly relevant results and more diverse coverage in the result set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By adjusting $$\lambda$$, you can control the trade-off between highly relevant results and more diverse coverage in the result set.
```

      "candidates": 50,
      "vector_field_path": "my_vector_field",
      "vector_field_data_type": "float",
      "vector_field_space_type": "l2"
    }
  }
}
```
{% include copy-curl.html %}

When querying multiple indexes, all vector fields must have matching data types and space types. These settings determine the similarity function used for document comparisons.
{: .note}

# Limitations

The following limitations apply to vector search with MMR reranking:

- **Supported query types**: MMR supports only a `knn` or `neural` query as the top-level query in a search request. If a `knn` or `neural` query is nested inside another query type (such as a `bool` query or `hybrid` query), MMR is not supported.

- **Remote index requirements**: When querying remote indexes, you must explicitly provide vector field information (`vector_field_path`, `vector_field_data_type`, and `vector_field_space_type`). Unlike a local index for which OpenSearch can automatically resolve this metadata from the index mapping, the system cannot reliably fetch this information from the remote cluster. Providing these details ensures correct parsing of the vector data and accurate similarity calculations.

> ## Related articles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Related pages
```
